I spent 10 years at Princeton this long
ago in my day every year there was talk
of people saying we're almost there by
producing more energy than we put in
which would then make it an energy
source for the world they would say oh
we're just 5 years away and that was 30
years ago so what's going on you're
almost there oh my
God this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
your personal at astral physicist I got
with me Paul mrio Paul what's up
co-hosting today good to see you my
friend good to see you man it's is
always fun love you and you you always
doing interesting stuff I'm trying yeah
you got your own like Off Broadway show
yeah that would then became Broadway and
then we now we're taking it out around
the country I was going to ask you
when's it going to get on Broadway well
we're going to no we're coming back
tired of seeing you in the streets off
Broadway we ran into each other with
nine people across from the Late Show
Off Broadway they loved it yeah yeah
called permission to speak and directed
by Frank Oz we love Frank Oz yeah he's
the best and we it involves people
telling stories and connecting people to
Shared stories interacting with the
audience yes bringing them on stage
telling my own stories we were just in
Florida with it we're going to be in
Rhode Island and people can go to Paul
mcu.com to see where we're going to be
mrio m r love you love it love it so you
know what we got today the day has to
arrive in all of our Lives when you want
to be in Arms Reach of a fusion
expert Fatina
abim did I pronounce that correctly
fatim
almost ibraimi yes Fatima ibraimi yes I
got that the last one okay I I love it
you you you have a PhD in plasma physics
that's a whole thing not just physics
yes plasma specific say plasas plasma
plasma and you're a research scientist
at the Princeton plasma Physics
laboratory PP PL correct out there in in
Princeton New Jersey yes up route one I
think yes yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
and there's a fabulous Home Depot right
there big
fan so this is uh people have heard
Fusion they've heard the word and
they've heard the word plasma and most
people think blood plasma this is
completely different plasma right blood
plasma is like what's left over in the
your body body right I mean after you
take out the red blood cells I exactly
yeah yeah so this is not that at all
right no not that start off get the
vocabulary on the table what is a plasma
so plasma is the fourth state of matter
and it's a
99% of of observable universe is plasma
so it's really the first state of matter
exactly want to think of it that way and
it's very unstable right it's unstable
and no not necessarily
dise just because you wrote notes
doesn't mean you're correct okay
continue vatima it's actually the we are
all
floating in a plasma state in our
universe so so and if you want to see uh
what is actually plasma is is when you
know electrons are kind of freely moving
and charge particles negative charge
particles
ions positive charge particles it's
basically a soup of you know charge
particles as plasma is all right so why
is it that we always in physics we see
plasma join together with the word
Fusion why are they relevant to each
other because um our sun that that
actually produces a lot of energy is
through Fusion Energy and that's a PL is
in a plasma state
so so Plasma in order to get a plasma it
has to be very hot yes nothing thing is
a cold plasma is there Yes actually uh
for the case of fusion it has to be 100
million degrees to actually achieve
Fusion but plasmas you know they could
have variety of temperature it could be
low temperature plasmas then you're not
going to have Fusion exactly you don't
have plasmas could also be lightening
strikes those that's plasma so I
remember this this this not a toy this
thing you could buy remember Spencer
Gifts anyone older than 70 will remember
lava lamps yeah lava lamps one of them
was this ball that it had this sort of
glowing thing in it and you put your
hand on the ball and it would react to
your hand touching the surface exactly
because it's charged particles you know
all of these you know the plasma kind of
resp it makes it Glow exactly because uh
particles could also can um de exide and
kind of produce photons and lights and
things okay so the the the electrons
recombine exactly and every time they
recombine they give off light exactly
excite and recombine and you know de
exite and you get the you get the light
so that's a plasma that's not at very
high temperature right exactly okay it
was just candle is also a plasma but
it's a flame of a candle is it yeah all
right so now you need high temperature
for Fusion yes what are you fusing it's
actually required for Fusion high
temperature is required to fuse really
light
atoms uh
hydrogen um and um also isotrope of
hydrogen heavier hydrogen
detarium um and a little bit heavier
tritium with having two actually uh
neutrons so they can coll light and it
can fuse and it has to be really really
high temperature to be able to kind of
overcome you know these forces and
create a lot of energy through neutrons
so the forces are because you have you
have mhm a positively charged proton
over here and another positively charged
proton over like Chargers repel right
exactly they don't want to get together
right and you're trying to overcome this
exactly with high temperature cuz high
temperature means higher speeds yes
within the the soup and you're able to
achieve the high temperatures or we're
still working toward the temperatures
have to be high the temperature actually
you can get very high temperature but
are we there yet yes that's what the
protons ask on their long
Journeys Are We There are we there I
have to go to the bathroom we're not
pulling
over yes we achieve really actually in
the experiments uh or or um facilities
that we have uh to create you know high
temperature plasmas to get to Fusion we
really get to high temperatures the
temperature we actually achieve in a
fusion experiments is even hotter you
know than the center of the sun yeah
Center sun is like 10 million degrees
something like that yes this is 100
million degrees what do you generate
what do you using they're trying to make
another star yes what you
this isn't on is
it this kind of stuff that like when you
were a little girl were you doing these
kinds of experiments in your basement
and then your parents said we got that's
how the Nemesis to superheroes are done
I'm going to make something hotter than
the center of the sun we just got you an
Easy Bake
Oven well I'm going to turn it I gave it
more power I gave it more power and now
it's 10 million degrees you know what
I'm baking plasma and you're going to
like
it you want it with or without
mozzarella cheese yes no no the lights
of the Town
[Music]
go that's Fatima again yeah y you don't
have to confess to that that's fine so
how do you get high temperature yes how
because as I understand it in order to
make the plasma high temperature
something else has to be at a higher
temperature than it is that right you
get the high temperature because plasmas
you know carry electr and current
electricity current you could say they
can they can exactly they can so
therefore they can they can get to very
high speed and high temperature so the
question is that so you get this soup
how do you where it's going to go so how
do you confine it if it's a 100 million
degrees what are you putting it in to
contain it to control it to control it
is uh put a lot of energy through
magnets well wa so a magnetic field it's
not a physical thing so you can't melt
that right right and all your charged
particles they respond to Magnetic
electromagnetism right it's another
force that our universe is
electromagnetic force yes that is long
range it's one of the fundamental forces
you know electromagnetic forces
everywhere you know our sun all the uh
Stars you know uh wherever you have
plasma you have electromagnetic forces
and they respond to it so you have the
gas you need to make the state of plasma
which means that you can you can you
know have some waves going into the gas
like antennas and create your plasma you
could induce
inductively current into your particles
plasmas it can go around your chamber
which we are talking about a a tokom
MAAC Amber a donut shaped chamber so Tok
right cuz Princeton has a Tok MAAC yes
yes it has a Tok MAAC what does that
word even mean because it's Russian oh
it's Russian it's a Russian it's a Russi
two Russian scientists called this
configuration they were a great act in
the 70s in Atlantic City they worked the
they worked the Stardust they worked the
flamingo okay so I did not know that
it's named for for actual scientists
very no it's not actual scientists The
two scientists actually called it it's
kind of the their invention T So when
you say this chamber yes the chamber is
basically sort of harnessing or
controlling the plasma that's the donut
shape the donut shape EXA being heated
up at incredible temperatures exactly
various ways of heating the gas become
plasma and heating the plasma to really
really high temperature but we heating
it to the point where it is we're at the
cusp of being able to use nuclear fusion
and get nuclear fusion that then Propel
Rockets through space much more quickly
the rocket is a plasma propulsion you
actually get rid of the plasma you make
from the back of the rocket you're not
confining it with magnetic field so the
plasma Rockets don't use Fusion not
necessarily they don't have to use
Fusion but if you kind of you know that
in space we don't have any power or any
there's no gas station the only thing we
have is our son sitting there and is
only going to give some amount of energy
there are rest stops with
McDonald's so if you want to go
far you need energy and you need Fusion
if you're going to go stay around with
solar panels you have enough energy to
to use locally you could use that for
just propulsion I remembered reading yes
because I know enough to know know that
in any gas at any temperature yes not
all particles are moving at the same
speed some are slow some are fast the
temperature is the average speed that
everybody's moving all right I
remembered that there's some method
where you
can pick off the fastest moving
particles and put them over here and
their average temperature is going to be
higher than where they came from here we
go treat them
special put them in slower group they're
the F class yeah they're in a special
class leave everybody else behind and so
you're cherry picking the fastest moving
particles is that a thing do I am I
remembering that correctly
conventionally is usually a collective
you know heating you know it's basically
you have uh through current you know
it's like current now plasma also carry
current current itself can heat you know
really uh it can actually it's basically
IC heating that's one way of heating the
plasma so that heats up internally not
from it's not hotter on the outside you
make it hot on the inside that's how
that's one way that's a conventional way
of actually heating up the plasma the
first way to do it hey Star Talk fans I
don't know if you know this but the
audio version of the podcast actually
posts a week in advance of the video
version and you can get that in Spotify
and apple pod podast and most other
podcast Outlets that are out there
multiple ways to ingest all that is
Cosmic on Star Talk I spent 10 years at
Princeton and this is long ago yeah like
I'm old man now in my day I we didn't
have
[Laughter]
electricity we would just yell and
someone would hear
us so in my day
at Princeton yes every year there was
talk of people saying we're almost there
MH by producing more energy than we put
in MH which would then make it an energy
source for the world MH a very
inexpensive energy source using readily
available ingredients like hydrogen
which you will find at your neighborhood
water molecule they would say oh it's
just five years away and that was 30
years ago yes so what's going on you're
almost there
oh my
God so wait wait let's back up so so
Princeton has a token MAAC but but uh
Lawrence Livermore has a different yes
configuration so there are two
approaches one is just toac actually
Fusion uh princeon has a special tokom
MAAC it's called a spherical tokom MAAC
which is kind of not like it it's like a
fat donut or corn Apple how is that
different than a standard to the nice
thing is is that is more compact oh okay
so that's and other differences but the
main thing is really puffy donut puffy
you could say that a puffy donut created
by it was created by a fluffin nator
which was uh I remember
thator I think so it's so it's a toac
but a spherical toac and it's very
special because of compactness and um
other things and uh so by using magnetic
field you you actually confine the
plasma okay so there's that so now let's
go to Lawrence Livermore in Livermore
California it's socalled inertial
confinement means that by shooting
lasers on a very at very small dense
Target you get Fusion so our plasma at
pppl pum plasma physics lab is not that
dense but we have very high
temperature and so there's something we
call a little bit specific something
called Lon criteria which is basically
the multiplication of the confinement
time how hot you get your density so
each combined and if it's larger than
something you say that oh I achieved
Fusion so inertial confinement has you
know more kind generates a
denser of all of those factors is
density the most important thing that
gets you to the sun gets high density
for free CU you're in the center of the
freaking sun it's dense there so so they
get free density but you're but what
you're generating at PPL is not as dense
so sort of like what I would get at
Walmart versus Sachs like if I were
buying a product it would be like the
lower that's the first time those two
stores have ever been in the same
sentence
ever wait so you can have it dense but
not hot or hot but not dense and some
combination of those two will get you
the fusion yes
point do do you know the optimum
relationship there so yes we know the
optimum is that you want to first of all
Fusion was achieved in 19 in um around
1995 but I have to correct that Fusion
was achieved like in
1947 it was just uncontrolled and we
called it a
bomb at all times she's referring to
control okay pick up now up the story
where you left off where we're safe we
done we got Fusion we got it it's
everywhere that's we got Fusion correct
exactly the H bomb you know uses the a
bomb as a trigger for it that's to give
it correct ex the controlled uh Fusion
was done um uh at at Princeton plasma
physics ra lab um in the device called
tfdr you know test Fusion uh reactor it
was was
obtained uh in not achieved in it was a
you know we obtained Fusion it was
achieved in um in in the '90s
uh here at princeon plasma physics rap
uh and also had another experiment jet
in Europe later so and uh and and about
10 million Jewel energy was you know um
or 10 10 megawatt million watt uh Power
was obtained so uh we've got Fusion
the just one Jewel per second is one
watt okay so she she's thinking jewels
in energy but watts is a power watt is
the correct one it's 10 megawatt and
actually the the record is 17 megawatt
later so it's around that much you but I
have a question you have this big fat
donut yes all right and the whole thing
is plasma but if you hit the fusion
threshold yeah does the whole thing
undergo fusion because in the in
Lawrence Livermore it's they know it's
if it's going to happen it's going to
happen in that little pocket that they
created yeah it's uh basically in the
vessel in the core of the vessel so it's
kind of your um plasma it's in the core
it actually needs to finally touch the
wall and that's where you actually get
the en it's touching the it's touching
the magnetic field around actually there
is real wall it's magnetic field all
around drywall like plaster
board we call it we call it
blanket that actually but what forms the
blanket in all seriousness like what
what creates the wall how does that work
it's a various solution for wall you
know it could be Tong Stone uh but does
it come as a byct a various material
it's a byproduct of what you're the way
you're manipulating the plasma a wall
creates out of that no actually no you
actually put a physical it's a physical
wall so why is it only measured when it
touches the wall uh because uh it's not
measured it's actually the plasma heat
is being measured in the core yes yes
and that's when you get really hot
plasma so what do you need the wall for
uh because it has to be confined and the
plasma needs to meet some boundary but
we thought that was the magnetic field
right isn't that the magnetic field so
the magnetic field is all around the
Tauros all around the donuts okay so the
magnetic fi so giv a shape yes exactly
give it a shape so you could say at all
you could think that you could put
direct magnets around your Your Vessel
or you actually put coils that goes
around your vessel and then the wall and
then the plasma have these magnetic
fields we've all played with iron F and
magnets and you can see magnetic field
lines and they form these Loops these
these toroidal Loops okay I know that on
the surface of the sun because it
doesn't rotate as a solid object there
are these magnetic fields in there that
get stretched as the sun rotates its
equator faster than other regions and
there are points where the magnetic
fields
snap they break and then they like
reconnect does that happen in in your
space yes it happens on the surface of
the Sun exactly the way you said Sun
actually as you correctly mentioned um
it's in a plasma State also create you
know Fusion Energy it's a lot of energy
in there another thing Sun creates is
magnetic field all the Motions of the
plasma there creates magnetic field so
I'm creating magnetic fields I need to
get rid of this magnetic field somehow
this in visible field lines that you I'm
creating where does it go it goes to the
surface and it kind of goes up like
Loops MH and then the loops kind of at
some point this invisible field lines
one go up one go down and then they snap
they kind of cancel each other right and
then they there's we call it Detachment
the whole Loop kind of get away and it's
chaotic right I mean it's sort of it's
it's not it's of like a bunch well it's
not control it's like a bunch of
5-year-olds in kindergarten on Skittles
you can't control them they're on
Skittles oh okay but but is it right yes
or no it could be places that is really
chaotic but also it could be likely
Collective you know um ropes of magnetic
field they come together they you know
they they they kind of cancel each other
magnetic field and then you get the
reconnection site and then the whole
thing like detached the plasma and the
magnetic field yeah this how you know
that physics do this not astronomers
because the people who study that they
called Magneto hydramist oh my God
that's just that should not be a word
no that is one long business
card fold out extra
section yeah this is your business card
it's like that it's you know just just
uh so let's get back to the energy and
then I want to go to Rockets yes so so
if you're going to be useful to anybody
you can't just make energy under the
ground in Princeton New Jersey you got
to it's got to be I don't want to call
it portable but it's got to be scalable
so you can move it to a town that can
generate energy that has no radioactive
byproducts you can generate a 247 and
you're just using hydrogen yes whose
method will be better for this the one
the inertial confinement from Lawrence
Livermore or the token MAAC design from
Princeton and other places we have to
pursue all the methods it's actually to
say wow I didn't know I was in
Congress that was what you said members
of Congress senator we need to pursue
all okay America is great and I like K
and you even don't know about other
methods We call we call this some more
Innovative um alternate method but again
you using magnetic field you know to to
kind of confine plasma and and you know
get Fusion Energy so all of them needs
to but all of them need to get to some
condition and the condition is that you
get more you produce more energy than
you put in otherwise what's the point
what's the point exact it's kind of the
net gain that you kind of need to get
and we haven't got there engineering
wise physics wise scientifically maybe
in some range we can say that oh we got
a energy from fusion and as I said this
happened also in the '90s you know at
pppf yeah there's a little bit of a
overstatement about the Livermore
experiment because that one had net
extra energy from the experiment and so
this was a it was championed but the
extra energy they got was relative to
the energy that they put in in this
little spot it didn't add up the the
whole system that made the thing a thing
to begin with right right so it wasn't
the total energy budget of the
experiment it was just the energy budget
of the of on the target yeah on on the
target it had to be attached to that
Target or near that Target to be yeah
that's how they make their measurements
so so the I think correct me if I'm
wrong if you're going to scale that
presumably you get some good engineers
in there to say how do we make this
little and you can make this more
efficient
and then you just run the energy need to
also make better lasers more efficient
lasers because the efficiency of it is
not too great right CU you have to put
energy in the lasers to make the the
lasers are going to help you
to exactly so engineering net gain is
not too high in that
experiment but the physics gain was good
and also the physics gain is also for
magnetic confinement we have good gain
before and we are actually moving toward
it with various you know configuration
okay and all of this the idea of excited
particles and where does that fit into
all of this and sort of how do you how
do you how do you calm down an excited
particle jazz music I don't know candles
scented candles like how do you you
asking her how does she cool down the
plasma is that what you're asking sense
because the whole plasma is excited
particles right but there specific
things you do to control the excited
particles oh yes yes I think that you
just want the whole hot you know uh
plasma confined
controlled in a and self-heated because
it kind of interestingly if it gets to
some temperature it can kind of on its
own can get you know heated the plasma
for a long long time and produce a lot
of energy and that is Fusion uh system
or or reactor and and we have made a lot
of progress each you know part of it but
as usual we're not there yet so so how's
how many how many years from now can I
plug in my wall and the energy on the
other side of that plug is Fusion at so
I mean you know that she going say five
years away then I told you okay we're
listening go on know that you didn't
hear that you didn't hear that go I mean
you know that like diesel engines all
lots of you know advancement excuse me
Senator Senator can I have the witness
answer the question please
directly she start she mentioned diesel
engines that is not on the table right
now so all takes decade yes and fusion
is we are it's a new physics Frontiers
the whole plasma physics when an
experiment you know is run you kind of
get into the new regime cuz what you're
when you're doing actual research you're
on a frontier right yeah you're not
you're stepping where no one has stepped
before to discover new things so you're
going to discover and you're going to
discover hurdles that you could not have
predicted seriously right so in other
words so I mean that's the issue right
yes you get into new regime you discover
new things and the whole in fact
actually the whole uh rocket system it
was you know a discovery through F in a
fusion system you know so let let's
pivot to that right now because it's
still decades away before she's going to
make my electricity all right uh I mean
uh Miss Easy Bake Oven over here
cranking stuff up when she was 10 but
she can't all
right commercially you know VI
commercially viable I mean you know we
Fusion in a laboratory everyone knows
how important that is culturally do we
have any practical application of fusion
right now in any capacity that bombs
other than bombs in a shorter time
scale um we do not have to have a large
scale Fusion uh system to to kind of
give electricity to a whole city we
could have compact
design
for taking you know for for a space you
ever wanted one of your questions on the
universe answered we all have questions
about the universe black holes to
quazars quantum entanglement wormholes
there is no end to the depths of cosmic
curiosity well the entry level of
patreon membership
with Star Talk gets you just that I
think it starts at $5 a month you have
access to the question line that reaches
our Cosmic query programming and not
only that we produce a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what do you think
you would be doing what okay but this
have to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a a songwriter for Broadway
musicals oh so that's the entry level
and the perks ascend from there uh
there's a level in fact where we send
you a an autographed copy of one of my
latest books uh right now it's Star
Messenger Cosmic perspectives on
civilization and it's signed with my
fancy fountain pen with purple ink so I
invite you to just check the link below
and all of that money goes to our
ability to experiment with new ways of
bringing the universe down to earth so
thank you for those who have already
joined and we welcome others to
participate in this Grand Adventure of
what it is to bring the universe down to
earth as always keep looking up right
now and forever yeah as long as we've
had Rockets we've been using what we we
call chemical fuel
which means molecules that have energy
contained within them and you break
apart the molecule the energy escapes
and that is our energy source and so
that has not ADV advanced in a hundred
years because your scientists are lazy
you're not really trying we use
different chemicals we have solid rocket
boosters that's a different propulsion
chemical than the big tank but
essentially the same concept it's the
same concept and so tell me about plasma
Rockets because there's a lot written
about it and we're not even talking
about Fusion yet we're just keeping in
your plasma universe yes plasma
propulsion is the basically we are uh
talking about the next generation of
rockets specifically plasma rockets and
they're highly efficient yes yes they
are highly efficient in terms of so
there are several things about them is
that um the exhaust velocity is really
high what's hard for people to see just
being Earth surface dwellers yeah
because you say if I want to go forward
I just have to run or step on the gas
you're doing that at the expense of
Earth beneath your feet so the only
reason why you can go forward is because
Earth is you're putting friction between
your foot on the earth and you're
changing the rotation of the earth
slightly you're pushing back on you have
something to push back on so this in
space you have nothing you got nothing
to push back on so the only way you can
change your speed is to give something
up and what are we giving up Mass take
it from there yes you take it and in
this case it's just you create the
plasma or plasmoid through the process
of like solar flares magnetic
reconnection um and you detach these
continuously detach this plasma from the
back of the rocket and at High Velocity
because it's at high temperature at high
temperature you get high speed yes high
speed um and and the the rocket is being
propelled forward and it's not uh it
doesn't have to be high temperature the
interesting about the magnetic Rec
connection is that magnetic energy is
being converted to kinetic energy so
it's all magnetic yes it's like the
solar doesn't have to be so this is like
you you want to get from point A to
point B yeah with this you snap your
fingers you're there it's like badass no
no no no badass Google Maps yeah
no no this it's it's different because
the particle comes out the back and the
rocket recoils from
it but by how much it's efficient but
what's the mass the mass is not too much
so so there are various like it's a tiny
mass at high speed and I have a high
mass thing on the other side that can
only then go forward at low speed right
so how am I going to get anywhere you're
going to get anywhere by kind kind of
having high thrust High force and that
is through again exhaust velocity you
get it and um it's constantly you're
kind of pushing it you know it's like a
constant acceleration you get somewhere
in a space it's different from your
right so you you you wouldn't use plasma
Rockets to launch no no no no because
they don't have that much you can't send
out that much mass because anytime you
see a rocket there's this is coming out
out and it goes the other way rocket Fu
to get it there to get it there and then
through SP about like some in crazy is
this this sort of like w like a massive
WiFi spot that's like got incredible
power is that what this plasma thing
where where we're going with this well
it's I think from what I've read and but
you you're in the middle of it so just
correct me if I'm wrong you when you're
in free space in open space and then you
turn on your plasma rocket you know it's
like one particle at a time and so you
slowly accelerate MH but
acceleration is a constant in this case
increase in your velocity there's
resistance coming on the Rock just
there's no resistance out there just
it's a recoil right but since it's
constant and you do it for a long time
you can reach very high speeds
exactly so based on the results that we
have and we are actually building
building this tabletop Prototype at the
plasma no tabletop we're building I'm
using my
oven at the lab you're building it you
can get to uh 100 500 kilometer per
second so it's a still so you can that
rocket can move at that speed could you
have a sunroof on the rocket at that
speed or would be that would that be a
sunroof to see just to you know you're
just looking up
well what is up in yeah that's
true but you need to to get to that
speed you know uh if you go to the Moon
uh you don't need that much of a speed
and you could do it with this plasmoid
rocket you can do you know small
payloads in three weeks or something
with this with this plasma roet and it's
not that this is SciFi no this is
actually for real because we do plasma
propulsion with just electric field now
we are doing magnetic using
electromagnetic field using magnetic
weeks is a long time and astronauts
Apollo they got there in three days but
we doing the fast you know it's
efficient efficient it's efficient it
means that it means that you go back and
forth It's not
expensive uh the fuel it's uh flexible
you could use really hydrogen you know
the one that we want to use for Fusion
you use really light atom so it's
efficient so it's fuel flexible and it's
efficient okay so so you would use this
this would be it's like a nice nice car
yes this would be the delivery vessel
for supplies exactly cuz you can just
plan ahead send it 3 weeks in advance
and then we get there quickly and
supplies are very heavy all right but
you'll get there but wait we're we're
using this plasma technology to get the
to get the supplies there well I I think
the point is because you're just sending
these very low mass particles though
they're traveling high speeds MH the The
Recoil is small but real and measurable
and it accumulates so the I bet if we
were to fly humans with one of these
Rockets it would only make sense if we
were going to like Pluto or something or
to the nearest star yeah for then you
need for to use this plasmoid propulsion
you need the nuclear energy Fusion or
some kind of a battery to kind of give
you both Force the trust yet you need
like the like can you control it so if
you're approaching a planet's atmosphere
can you control yes because otherwise
are you just driving that rocket right
through the center of that well that's a
big problem in space travel because if
you can accelerate and you want to land
somewhere you have pull up right right
there's no there's no right right so
what you have to do is like you know
flip the ship around and then have it
and have it send out particles the other
way so then it's a negative acceler
deceleration and so so that that eats up
some of your plan but might we use this
going to Mars do you think yes uh yes
because of the again it's because of
efficiency you know you could use
chemical rockets in 10
years to go there once if you use all
the resources you have but you really
need plasma
propulsion um for getting to the mar you
also need the energy for that and that's
what the compact Fusion compact system
come that that's why the we we we work
on that okay so so the plasma rocket is
not the same thing as a plasma Fusion
rocket because the fusion is just a
whole other source of energy yeah so the
plasma rocket the the energy can come
from just the uh some solar panels
because for example for the moon we have
the sun sitting there so we can get you
know um use the solar panels get power
that can't be the level of of compared
to plasma Fusion getting through through
solar panels cannot give you the same
level it's enough from the low I want
more than enough I want the best I'm an
American and that's how we do this in
America but we still we we don't we
don't even have that we are not this is
like a FedEx going to moon coming back
yes that's what we talking about very
efficiently and uh and you don't need
that much of a power to do that like 500
kilowatt is enough it's enough you don't
need Mega Millions so they get there
faster but the guy still leaves the
package like 20 feet from your door and
you have to walk out in your underwe
steal it right nothing changes with you
scientists you don't really you walk out
in your underwear to get your packages
okay I will Port you my neighbor
requested
that wait so so I just want to like
settle my understanding on this when you
have a plasma you have high moving
particles you can send them out the back
and you recoil yeah and the acceleration
is slow but it's steady and it
accumulates yes okay so if you have
solar
panels the solar panel is not itself a
propulsion mechanism but it's a source
of energy yes and you can channel that
energy back into your plasma yes and
keep the plasma going as long as we're
close enough to the sun exactly okay now
now you're really far from the Sun you
still need an energy source M and what
would that energy source be if you can't
use solar panels anymore because the sun
is too dim would that be the fusion
Source yes it's fusion um it has to be
nonchemical yes a non-chemical so your
Fusion source of energy would still be
heating the
plasma basically yes the fusion I had
not appreciated that still
plas rocket exactly exactly it's a still
a plasma rocket because uh because your
magnets you know first of all you hand
you can use several but you still have
to power your rocket and the source of
power it could be solar panel or it
could be it could be the yeah
non-chemical Fusion Energy this is one
plenty of hydrogen gas in the universe
so you can scoop it up put it in so
there are filling stations in the UN
told you
that when it's going through space is
the plasma sort of sort of morphing and
changing and you have to account for
that I mean because it can survive my
understanding is it can survive Plasma
in various States right I I would
imagine you have not been able to
document every state that it can survive
in right it's an Ever evolving science
so it's just that basically you need the
fuel here is like hydrogen helium you
have the fuel you can you can actually
use the local resources in a space for
the fuel that's calls it isru yeah
insitu resource utilization yes ah which
is a terrible acronym but uh yeah isru
that's the big thing yes because then
you don't have to haul everything with
you exactly so that you want to be
that's why that's why we call it
efficient basically it's fuel
flexibility that you can kind of yeah it
doesn't have to be helium it could be um
hydrogen any kind and it doesn't have to
be Argan because some of the electric
propulsion your gas don't even get me
started with argon that's a ridiculous
waste of time um but why argon why not
Krypton or uh all of them it could be
any kind of gas a superhero
Krypton I told you lost we I'm weak
around here I
feel so so there's you you you it can't
exist on its own it needs some other
source of energy but what can't exist
the the plasma the plasma then you kind
of uh you draw um you draw some you
create it you ionize it you create the
plasma yes so that's the specific you
have to read the paper and the pattern
to actually see you see how the plasma
is Created from this fuel local Fuel and
then you get a plasma but as soon as you
create a plasma you get rid of it from
the back of your rocket by the process
of magnetic reconnection and you've got
to lose some of your mass right every
time you go going to go anywhere but
that's what I was saying earlier
magnetic reconnection is it's plasmoids
come get created they're not very
unstable but then become over time
unstable and Decay magnetic reconnection
sort of there's this
constant instability and how you control
that and are you still working on being
able to control that so so four rockets
for plasma propulsion we are not
confining anything so we don't basically
we don't care about stability because in
a fusion device you can find plasma you
don't want it to go unstable for a
rocket you just make the plasma you use
the magnetic field and then you just
pollute space I get it exactly exactly
exactly you get rid of it and then you
make new plasma and get rid of it and
then the rocket just gradually goes the
direction 1800 got Junk for space
because you're just putting garbage into
space with that attitude I understand
but the plasma is not really a junk
because as I said
99% of our observable universe is plasma
it's basically some charge particles you
have in the space that you always have
low density plasma everywhere in the
space see she was good she said the
observable universe cuz we don't see the
Dark Matter yeah we don't know what the
hell that is but it's not plasma yeah so
she got that yeah yeah yeah yes yeah so
you could say that but aren't you
altering with with this this plasma
coming out of the back of a rocket yeah
aren't you altering space in a way by
putting these particles into space if if
space is 99% plasma to begin with would
it's just put more water in putting more
water in a pool yeah it doesn't care
it's like putting more hair gel in my
hair F state of
matter yeah we are floating in plasma in
the universe anyway so you kind of make
some little plasma and get rid of it go
somewhere Universe one mind yeah
Universe one mind yes so Fatima I got to
land This Plane so let let's I want
straight answers you're in Congress now
Professor abrahimi how soon are we from
having
plasma energy generating centers in
every city we are close actually it's a
can you give us five but five years I
would say 5 to 10
years experiment
30 you're going to be right there we got
a
number so in terms of that but that is
drag you back in here yes but that's a
scientific net gain I said okay if you
want to put it on the uh you electricity
I'm not worried about the engineers they
come through when you need them okay
that's first second when will we have
Rockets with humans in them that will
use plasma propulsion and will the first
trip to Mars use it the first trip I
don't know because it's possible that if
you put if all the resources are put
there you could get their once with
chemical right propulsion but again to
be to have a
sustainable kind of um uh
travel uh so you need uh plasma
propulsion does NASA have a group
working on plasma propulsion or do they
call you up to get their what do we do
next F yes give me more more
funding there you go I knew she'd be
begging for money at some point but how
can a human travel that fast under
through under isn't that an issue plasma
propulsion I mean is slow acceleration
slow at acceleration your face is not
going to do this no no no no not like
you
know I wish I just wanted to get some of
the lines out on the face seems like
acceleration really fun way totic
surgery
could I say that actually maybe we look
at more um closer T you know places to
go and I think Moon could be as I said
it could be just plasma propulsion you
don't what are we going to do with the
mo have we've been to the Moon Moon
resources there's all sort I got moon
rocks in my top drawer my everybody one
of the way one of the way to actually
create Fusion Energy it's something is
called a neutronic means that you kind
of the other uh you use theerum helium
you know uh to create energy and you
don't produce neutrons so that's just
the pp chain in the center of the sun
there's no loose neutrons coming out of
that yes exactly neutrons are bad
because they come out and they'll they
Nothing Stops them they don't have
charge they're very pushy they're their
advantages they don't have to push the
other particles don't even know they're
there
am I right yes neutrons yeah yes exactly
Dark Matter neutrons yeah yeah yeah so
that's a fun uh reaction in the sun it's
called the the the pp chain proton
proton chain it uses duum and trium no I
don't remember tridium but we have uh
helium 3 exact exactly exactly helium 3
ter so you have also fuel for also
Fusion so there are things there and um
you want to make some steps for the next
generation you know non-chemical
propulsion you first make some good step
progress and then gradually going
further you use Fusion Energy to go
there yeah so in this process you guys
seem fairly lazy you're taking your time
five years are you are you using in all
seriousness are you using how does AI
factor into any of your work or will it
in terms of the advancements you're
going to you're trying to make it's a
fantastic question it's there can you
just say that again fantastic
question I didn't hear it I didn't hear
her say that fantastic Yes actually she
is AI
right she doesn't really exist did you
think she was real I kept and my finger
goes right through goes through right
through her leg it's so weird yeah
exactly I didn't want to say anything I
was like you know I think she's been
around the uh plasma too
much she is plasma I'm sitting to a
plasmo don't tell it yeah yes I think
yes definitely you know computers first
of all all most of the progress we made
in plasma physics and fusion have always
been you know together experiments and
advanced computation work together to
make discoveries and also any kind of
achievement is has to be together well I
think we kind of need to wrap this we do
yes we
unfortunately uh give me some words for
the future be patient in terms
of okay we're fine okay I'm sorry I
asked it's no the answer is like this
well how do you define future yeah yeah
yeah so let me say for the future is
that progress and Discovery doesn't
happen doesn't happen overnight it's the
continuous uh work of scientists
long-term Investments
uh to kind of you put all the energy you
have collaboration all of that and um
cross pollination of various types of
you know group working on various types
of plasma or types of devices Fusion
experiments progress happened like that
so it's not so it's just it's also new
physics we learn every day in every
regime of plasmas we learn new things
and we apply it like this you know
rocket Thruster we apply it for other
applications what we learn in Fusion we
also apply it for other um for other
applications and uh so it's just a it's
an continuous work so Fatima typically
at the end of our yes our our sessions I
offer the viewer a cosmic perspective on
the topic yes of the day but you you so
beautifully summarized the plight of the
scientist the engineer Society funding
sources that's any and all that I would
have said in my Cosmic perspective thank
you so thanks for making my job just a
little easier
today good to have you man always great
to
be good luck you need some of that
sometimes right when you're messing with
plasma exact and one day you'll give us
a tour of your basement exactly listen
whatever you do welcome both of you
thank you well and keep up your vague
answers now it's really interesting very
fascinating this has been Star Talk Neil
degrass Tyson here your personal
astrophysicist reporting from my office
the Hayden planetarium the American
Museum of Natural History in New York
City as always keep looking up
[Music]